So we are going to start hearings this morning on the
planning bill and Natural Environment.
Bill, welcome to Engineering New Zealand, uh,
to you are our first submitter for the day.
So, uh, welcome to our select committee.
You've got 20 minutes with us this morning.
So, uh, we'll hand it over to you for your opening remarks
and introductions and then open it up for members questions.
So over to you. Thank you.
Wonderful. Thank you very much, Kiara, everyone.
I'm Richard Tempa.
I'm the Chief executive, uh, of, uh,
TGA Engineering New Zealand.
And, uh, prior to
that I was the chief executive at Manou District Council.
Uh, on my left I have Annette Sweeney,
who's the managing director
and principal environmental engineer of Good Earth Matters.
Uh, Annette is a chartered professional engineer in three
waters infrastructure
and has extensive, uh, experience in strategic planning
and consenting of said infrastructure.
And on my right is Tanya Williams, our Chief Chief Engineer
and General Manager member services.
And, uh, prior to joining us, she was the water
and Waste General Manager at MWH Stand Head.
So thank you very much for the chance.
Uh, present engineering New Zealand
represents the engineering profession in New Zealand.
We represent professional engineers, technicians,
and technologists, and have approximately 20
or 3000 members.
Engineers play a vital role in, uh,
the consenting system In all its different forms.
They are planners, regulators, designers, constructors,
and shakers of infrastructures, infrastructure, building
and construction.
Um, we have general support for the bill.
We strongly support the idea
of strong integrated spatial planning
'cause that has the potential
to revolutionize the way we plan, develop,
and live in our communities,
and it will deliver on the outcome sought
by reform if it is done effectively and sensibly.
In terms of things we would like to see improved,
first thing is we think the primary legislation needs
to be be strengthened.
Uh, too much has been deferred to the secondary legislation
and later processes.
We need to know
what the national policy direction will look like
and what is included as this is the foundation
of the proposed system.
Uh, the na n sorry,
natural environment build must include a goal
for infrastructure critical to the national, uh,
policy direction.
An example of this, if you're looking at say, uh, the
to live in highway that needs, uh, water rights in order
for the infrastructure to be built.
Because you're dealing with huge amounts of stormwater,
the legislation needs more detail.
And in particular definitions, we need clear definitions
of everything that is used in the bill.
Otherwise it risks, uh, the courts trying to decide
what is in and what is out.
So now asked to Annette to talk about the timeframes.
Thank you, Richard. And thank you Committee.
Um, engineering New Zealand understands
that there is a real need to move
to the new resource management system as quickly
and efficiently as possible.
Um, and as Richard has said,
we strongly support spatial planning
as a key foundation in the plan making process.
We are very concerned about the proposed timeframes as well
as the sequencing of the regional spatial plan in relation
to setting of environmental limits.
And I know that you've heard several submissions on these
matters, so we just wanna focus on a few points in terms of,
um, implications for infrastructure.
The timeframes for the RSP in itself are unrealistic,
and there's a risk that
that will not achieve the evidence-based strategic RSP
that is visd, nor provide the certainty for enabling growth.
Infrastructure providers will be expected
to input into the RSP in a meaningful manner to inform some
of that mandatory com content.
Um, one of those in particular being that it needs
to include the existing
and future key infrastructure, including corridors
and strategic sites and opportunities to make better use
of existing infrastructure.
Now for water service providers, this will need
to be done at the same time
that water services CCOs are being established and stood up
and staff are transitioning into those new entities.
Water services strategies will be completed probably midway
through their RSP process,
but the RSP will be developed ahead
of things such like the stormwater network risk management
plans and assessments to confirm the adequacy of stormwater
and wastewater services.
So we think that there's a high risk of misalignment
between the reforms under the RMA
and the local water done well reforms.
And that means that some spatial decisions may be locked in
without reliable evidence on infrastructure capacity,
affordability, and risk.
There's a few further risk
of community consultation overload
and confusion with so many similar processes
occurring concurrently.
We also think that there's a real risk
of development exceeding environmental limits if the RSP
proceeds ahead of setting environmental limits.
Again, we are aware that you've heard
several submissions on this matter.
An example is in Hawke's Bay,
where the future development strategy has identified water
supply as a growth constraint.
And we also know that the aquifer is over allocated
while we have an interim allocation
through a proposed plan change.
The actual environmental limit in terms of allocation
of water is our known at this stage.
We consider that things like the environmental limits need
to be confirmed prior to the RSP being developed.
And without this re-sequencing, we will not be able
to be confident.
The RSP is consistent with environmental limits
or sets the spatial implications of environmental limits
as it's required to do so.
So in summary, we strongly encourage the committee
to make changes to the bills, to resequence the RSP to occur
after environmental limits that will also enable more time
for infrastructure providers
to undertake the necessary work, particularly
that which is directed under the local Government Water
Services Act, so that they can inform the evidential
and strategic basis of the RSP
Re-sequencing will minimize the risk
of the RSP exceeding environmental limits
and will also optimize the value
of investment in water services assessment
and planning that's required
to be done under the local water done reform local water.
Done well for I Pastor Tanya to talk on our next topic.
Good Morning committee. I wanted to, uh,
talk about livable communities From an engineering
perspective, it's really important that development happens
where infrastructure is there to support it and that hazards
and climate risks are properly considered before this,
and that the urban environment remains
healthy for those who live there.
We importance of design
and planning for communities so that they have a place
where they want to live and have access to all the services.
From an engineering perspective, the current drafts risks
enabling development that will shaped primarily
by market forces rather than requiring development, uh,
to contribute to the positive lead to the resilience, health
and social connections of communities.
Uh, we really need more than market forces.
I have seen multiple examples in the years.
One, uh, specific example was in Sydney, Australia, uh,
where an apartment block was developed,
where the stormwater system was unable to have it tapped in
so nobody could actually live in the apartment block
because the services
and infrastructure was not there to support it.
These things are risks.
We've seen development on, um,
and New Zealand on flood prone land being allowed to, uh,
for various market forces
and on highly lfi uh, land still today.
So we've, uh, outlined our specific recommendations
and our proposal, but these are some
from an engineering perspective. Hand back to Richard.
Thank you. Uh, the last point we'd like
to cover off is the, uh, challenges of regulatory relief
as proposed in the bill.
Uh, we are really concerned
that this will have a chilling effect, uh,
in particular on local authorities not protecting areas
of significant value for heritage
cultural environmental reasons,
because they'll be concerned
of potential financial implications.
We understand the intent, particularly in situations
where landowners face significant losses of
to highly productive land
or are unable to use large proportions of their property.
However, you could end up in a situation
where local government is meeting the sandwich
between two acts on one hand,
regulatory relief on the other hand, a requirement
by the crown to take action.
The example I would use of that is the has no act,
which requires local government to identify hazardous sites.
Uh, an example I can think
of in my past career was the identification of a, um,
property development which was occurring on a site which had
previously been a petrol station.
Now, the, uh,
because of that particular activity under the has no act,
that site is designated as a has no site goes into the,
has no register, and
that is permanently recorded on the property file for
that piece of property,
which substantially reduces the value of that property
because that's something people are going to react to
if regulatory relief applied in this case, um,
you create this disincentive for council
to carry out the intent of the has no act
because it might be facing potentially hundreds of thousands
of dollars, uh, in regulatory relief.
So we think, uh, that something more akin
to section 85
of the existing RMA would probably be a
better choice in this space.
Thank you very much for your time.
We're happy to take any questions. Thank
You Richard, And thank you for those insights.
Um, look, we're gonna start with Rachel
Brooking. Yeah, thank
you. Thanks. This is
a really helpful submission.
Thanks for all the, um, consideration
that's obviously gone into it.
Uh, I'm interested in the infrastructure exception and,
and you're saying that there needs to be more criteria
around what can be, um, considered significant
and then exempted.
Um, and then I see also when you're talking about, uh,
natural hazards, uh, you are concerned about, um,
clause 1, 4 6, um, where they don't,
those provisions don't apply,
that natural hazard provisions don't apply
to upgrade maintenance of infrastructure.
But what I was wondering if you can do, sorry,
this is my question finally getting there.
Um, is you can, can you give us some examples of the sorts
of things that you think, um, if it, if the criteria
that you suggest were
to exist would be significant infrastructure
and be able to get through and,
and maybe something that wouldn't?
Uh, so I'll start that
and either of you feel free to jump in.
Uh, key examples of infrastructure is where you have
critical service infrastructure that is, is preexisting.
So for example, if you think about, uh, water treatment
and wastewater treatment for, for urban areas,
that is an example of infrastructure that you need
to have in some form.
So one of the challenges with the current, uh,
RMA is if you are recon consenting a wastewater treatment
plant or water treatment plant
or something like that, often the starting point is
what if this didn't exist at all?
What if there wasn't, you know, 70,000 people living here
that, that need these services?
So that to me is an example of where you have
to take into account.
There is a, a clear requirement for it for infrastructure,
um, other forms of infrastructure
where you might want to be looking.
This would be, uh, less critical infrastructure.
So possibly, uh, infrastructure which is being used not for,
uh, you know, life safety reasons or something like that.
So it might be, uh, an additional roading network
or, um, subdivision water feature or something like that.
Thank you. Um, do you have, did either
of you want to add to
That? Um, I think just
in terms of infrastructure, I guess one
of the challenges with the bill is it's not defined
anywhere in the bill other than in relation to designations.
Yeah. And that doesn't cover anything
that goes into the water space.
Um, and I guess also in terms
of defining significant infrastructure,
what I would say is one, one of the challenges
that we have had in past practice is often it's defined
around nationally significant, um,
whereas I think regionally significant is actually quite
important in terms of local water supplies,
particularly in relation to, you know,
like those lifeline um, services
And, and that, um, natural hazards exception.
Can you explain the concern with that exception?
Um, so that is on page 13 at the top of page 13.
Ah, that, that is essentially that natural hazards, um,
doesn't apply
to the construction upgrade maintenance operation of
infrastructural or primary production activities.
So our concern there is if you have natural hazard hazards,
say flooding, earthquake, uh,
or subsident risks, you need
to take those into account when you are, for example,
let's say building a large effluent pond on a, uh,
a dairy site, building a wastewater treatment plant,
putting in a cell cell phone tower
or anything, you need to understand your natural hazards
and you need to make sure they are taken into account in
both the design construction, but also the location.
So the classic example is if you're looking at an effluent
holding pond and you're in an area which
I know well say the man were two, which is prone
to flooding, you wanna make sure you put that outside
of the likely overland flow path
that you're gonna get in high rainfall
Lot, you know, and, and also, um, is for upgrades.
So it's not just new infrastructure,
but when, as we are, uh, needing
to do at the moment maintaining
and upgrading our current infrastructure,
these are really important factors.
Mm. And Cameron Luxon had a clarify,
Well you answered it to Rachel Brooking about, um,
definitions and you said that your primary
or submission about, um, definitions
of infrastructure being unclear, like how sort sort
of definition in this bill,
how do you think we could go about as a committee, um,
for finding a way to get some definitions?
Well, I, I guess the first thing would be
to include the infrastructure definition
and the, the main, um, part of the interpretation,
the act rather than just in relation to designations.
Um, I think the RMA definition
of infrastructure works well.
Um, one of the challenges, I guess an example about
where it doesn't work well is what's come out recently in
the mp, the recent, um,
national policy statements this year, um, with the addition
of the term additional infrastructure, um,
and how that relates to stormwater.
So that's created a lot of uncertainty.
So, um, in terms of getting clarity for me,
it would be actually having a definition of structure,
which is overarching across the two bills.
Thank you. And LA
Thank you for your submission today.
Um, I was interested in your suggestion about central
government being liable for penalties.
And you know, I mean, as you point out, local government is,
and you give the example of the defense force with,
uh, PFAS.
What, what, what made you raise this?
Is this common internationally?
Can you give us some more context about how it works?
Uh, in, in this case, this one was raised particularly
through, uh, personal experience of dealing with, uh,
the defense force, contamination
of the O Haki air base from, uh, P-F-A-S-P-F-A-S, uh,
uh, basically, uh, nearly indestructible chemicals used in
aviation fire foam.
There was a huge amount of contamination
because firefighters had practiced, uh, simulating,
putting out aircraft fires.
Now what happened in that case is that, uh,
the council working
with really talented engineers found a solution
for the local community, which was
to put in a water source well away from the contamination
and then pipe it to all the farms and houses in the area.
And that cost around $12 million to implement.
The challenge was, is if that had been an airport,
so let's say it had been a commercial airport,
they would've had to fund that solution.
If it had been any private business
or in fact local government itself, they would've had
to fund the solution because
of the way the RMA ACT was worded.
There was, uh, the defense force could be prosecuted
by horizons, but they couldn't be,
there was no enforcement mechanism.
They couldn't be required to pay, they couldn't be fined.
Mm-hmm. So when the crown does something wrong,
it would be extremely helpful if there was a mechanism
requiring them to fix it.
Mm-hmm. And this seems now we were very lucky
and the community owes a huge debt of thanks
to David Parker, who was the minister at the time, who
recognized that this wasn't the right thing.
But the only reason that was, uh, mostly funded by,
by the crown, partly by by local government, was
because he recognized this was clearly unjust.
And, um, forgive the colloquialism beat up on treasury
and the defense force to get the money
out of them to pay for it.
Mm-hmm.
Pre anchor. Just a couple
of very quick questions, but firstly, thank you.
Very thorough submission and I found it really valuable.
Um, you've mentioned, uh, that you'd support a system
that has mechanisms to ensure
that the environment isn't left worse off, uh,
but ideally improved.
Um, but as far as I can tell, you haven't gone quite as far
as to say that the goal states environment bill, uh,
which is no net loss
of indigenous biodiversity is not ambitious enough.
Is, would you, would you support that being changed?
Or where, where do you sit on that?
I, I think, um, we've looked at this pragmatically
and said that the, the goal is a,
a pragmatic approach right at the moment, you know,
I think all engineers would love to create situ uh,
solutions where we could improve biodiversity,
but in order to get to there, the first step has
to be stopping degradation.
And so let's focus on doing that
because there's a lot of situations where
that isn't happening at the moment.
But ideally, if we could have the building, the, the,
you know, the, in the, the built environment improved
by diversity, that would be,
I think a good goal. I,
I would say that is aspirational.
I think it would be very challenging to legislate for it
because it would potentially substantially increase
the cost of infrastructure.
And I dunno that that's affordable.
A quick Supplementary on that, just,
just picking up on,
and it goes back to the timing as well with you saying like,
you know, the national direction needs to be clear
before the regional plans.
Um, do you think there is a case where, uh,
'cause you point out that environmental outcomes could get
worse if the bill just proceeds as is, um,
do you think there could be scope
for something like an overarching maintain
or improve goal that sort of put
that line in the sand in, in light
of potentially national direction not
being all fully in place?
Um, yeah, I think that would be helpful, um,
as a backstop in case
that national direction's not there. Yeah. Mm-hmm.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Look, we have met time.
We appreciate your time this morning
and, um, those useful considerations and insights.
So thank you very much. Very
Helpful. Thank you. Thanks.
So now moving on to our next submission this morning, uh,
the New Zealand initiative who are here
with us in person this morning.
Good morning, Bryce.
Eric, uh, welcome to the select committee this morning.
Um, you have 20 minutes with us, so we'll hand it over
to you to, uh, talk us through your submission
and then we'll open up the questions. Sure.
Thank you and good morning everyone.
Um, and thank you for the opportunity
to present the submission, um, on these two bills,
and particularly for allowing us to have 20 minutes,
which is very unusual and, but it's great.
Um, so I'm Nick Clark,
I'm a senior fellow at the initiative.
Um, and with me this morning, uh, co-authors Dr.
Bryce Wilkinson and Dr.
Ben Leski, and also our chief economist, Dr.
Eric Crampton, who also contributed to the submission.
So I'll speak briefly to introduce a submission
and we'll hand over, uh, to my colleagues
so they can hit on some specific points of importance to us.
So look, we were very pleased
that the government's intent has been to replace the RMA
with the system based on property rights,
on the enjoyment of property rights.
And, um, property rights have been proven internationally
to be crucial for economic growth
and improved standards of living.
Nobel Price for economics in 2024 reinforce that.
And, um, also, countries that don't respect property rights
or the rule of law tend not
to have good environmental records
either, which is important.
The RMA is an important,
although not the only factor
behind New Zealand's poor economic performance over recent
decades for more than three decades,
the RMA has un newly restricted land use,
inflated housing costs delayed
and made infrastructure horrendously expensive,
and its compliance costs have impeded productivity,
which has been dismal.
So we were very encouraged by the, um,
national Act Coalition agreement commitment on RMA reform
and the cabinets decisions in 2024,
including its 10 principles for replacement legislation.
The time taken to draft
and introduce legislation was very quick.
Um, but perhaps it was too quick, um, too constrained
by a three year parliamentary term
because unfortunately, despite the good intentions
and public statements by the government,
the bills themselves haven't hit the mark.
Why? Well, look, neither Bill mentions property rights
as a purpose or among its goals.
Regulatory relief provisions are in contrast,
what some think not strong enough.
Rather too strong the bills dropped, the need
for a neat public benefit justification for restrictions
by emitting entirely.
Section 32 of the RMA
the bills confer far too much power on ministers
who set national directions.
And this matters because the goals of the legislation,
the top of the funnel, so to speak,
from which everything else flows,
are multiple competing unre, unranked,
and unconstrained by cost considerations.
Many terms from the goals are also vaguely worded at
undefined in the bills.
There is no architecture
to operationalize the planning bills goal
for competitive urban landmarks,
which is a novel, uh, feature.
We believe that litigation over the meaning of the goals
and how they interact with each other is highly likely.
And this committee, however, can fix the bills
by recommending some principled amendments
to align them all with cabinet's.
Good intentions and Bryce Ben Europe
will talk through these.
Um, but firstly I'll just hand over to Bryce.
He'll talk about property rights and economic matters.
Thank you Nick. Uh, chair and committee members.
Um, as Nick said, uh,
we're concerned particularly about
insufficient property, right?
Protections and value for money disciplines in the bill
goals should not be pursued regardless of cost.
And the bills need to, to say that more generally.
There are two fundamental principles
that should guide government intervention
that we think should be explicitly in the rules.
First, government should only intervene when doing so.
Provides net benefits for the public,
and that's the cost benefit analysis test.
Secondly, intervention measures should
respect property rights.
And the Public Works Act shows, ah,
that can be and should be done.
These bills currently fail to embed either discipline.
First, they entirely remove RMAs section 32,
national interest test.
And second, they regulatory relief framework is inadequate.
Um, to illustrate what is missing, um,
consider the purpose statements in both bills.
Both bills start out to say they establish a framework
for pursuing A or B, depending on what the bill is.
We, uh, to focus your minds or illustrate our point.
You could, each purpose statement could just add this
qualifying clause at the end of both of them, uh,
through measures that respect property rights
and demonstrably provide positive net benefits
for New Zealanders.
So value for money test
and a respect for property rights test.
And if you added those to the purpose statement,
then officials would've to follow that through
with measures in the bill.
Well, this change would do is it would require transparent
cost benefit analysis before setting national directions.
And it would require analyzing the
specific problems which we are seeing out in the community,
which do justify the intervention
and do explain what the intervention's meant to achieve
what it's correcting.
And it would also provide a statutory anchor
for challenging unjustified restrictions in a nutshell
that would usefully change incentives.
Uh, uh, one suggestion on the bill failing everything else
is our put option as, as a, a fullback safeguard.
So where a regulation reduces land values materially
through taking property rights
or use rights owners could require their land
to be purchased, um,
by the authority doing this at an unimpaired value.
And that would impose a real discipline on people
making those decisions.
Those change, the changes we are suggesting here are about
improving incentives to focus on net public benefits
and win-win outcomes for living standards housing
and the environment as nick property, right?
So that important for solving treasury of the common
and anti comments, problems, and for productivity growth.
Thank you very much.
Now, now over to Ben.
Um, we already mentioned
that the bill is pretty much silent on
explaining its own terms.
It's a particular problem
because, uh, we could, we could consider the rationale
that we take, um, the terms in the bill from
previous cases, that case law from the previous bill,
the problem, the, the previous act.
But the problem is that courts will be interpreting the
terms within the architecture that they're given.
That is the act that they have been provided.
If the act is silent, that would have
to go about either silent
or provide some kind of context that you might not intend.
And if that's the case, then the courts will be either going
through a long lengthy process of redefining
and figuring out what is meant
or it will be making conclusions
that are wrong or not intended.
And in this particular case, I want
to talk about competitive land markets, which is now
considered a goal or supposed to be a goal in the act.
There is no definition or explanation of what that means.
So this particular problem, because that term is new,
the concept is new, and it's intended
to fundamentally change the economic logic
of our resource management system.
Um, what is needed is not just, um, a definition, so, uh,
basically in a interpretive clause,
but like it's what was also required is an,
an interpretive provision of the definition so
that it's very clear that gives it operational content.
The classic example is N-P-S-U-D.
Um, so
what we don't want is we don't want a definition going
into national direction.
It's too variable. It can change between ministers
and the, it's too significant.
Uh, a point in terms of how to operationalizes the logic
of the resource manage system
to put it international direction.
If you try and do that in national direction, uh,
officials will push back
and say it actually belongs into primary legislation
and that's why you need
to solve this problem in the primary legislation.
And that's also why it needs a definition,
but also operational content similar to how the SUD did that
with well functioning urban environments that did that.
Correct. But what it didn't do is it didn't do
that for competitive land market.
It was completely absent.
So what we are proposing is that you do that kind of step,
but you put that into primary ledge.
The second thing that I want to raise is sections 93 to 98
have been discussed as a type
of agile land release, but it's not.
Um, they allow councils
to basically mark their own homework.
It's self-referential.
They will consider the work
that they do against their own policy objectives
and then say that we are doing a trying to find job
and then they have complete discretion whether
they do something about it.
So they're allowed to fail
and they're also allowed not to do something about failing.
Um, that is not responsive and it's not accountable.
Um, also it pushes a lot of costs
and burden onto developers to prove that there is any value
to be created before they're even allowed to proceed.
So we propose it to reverse that logic where it's very easy
to demonstrate that there is a case to be,
that there's value to be created
and that they basically on that basis get green light.
Eric's gonna talk about that more so,
and then it's on the burden on the regulator to show
that it's actually not the
case rather than the other way around.
Because what you then do is you basically
dis the base development.
April. Um, just a few key asks
that we have remove current
and expected from the definition of competitive end markets.
It reintroduces the, uh, project, uh, predict
and provide kind model,
which is basically effectively rationing.
Um, that goes, it's fundamentally antithetical
to the concept of competitive end markets.
Um, include the definition
and with operational content, um,
we want an independent check and balance on councils.
So basically like, uh, there's either expert panel
or some kind of function that over
that looks over the market structure in terms
of whether it is competitive or not.
And then if it is not, then uh, there's action required
and Eric will talk more about that.
Cool. Thank you committee.
It is kind of deja vu all over again.
I think I was here about three years ago talking about
similar reforms and we had a similar list of priorities
that weren't ranked and there, there was a bit of a problem,
but as I understand things here,
there's been a principled decision that we're going
to have a thin legislative framework
with secondary instruments coming afterwards.
And there's recognition that there's an awful lot of work
yet to be done to get this into shape
before it comes back to the house.
Uh, so it's great that we got the opportunity
to try and make this a little bit better.
One of the things we would love to see
where there has been a principle decision
to keep a very thin primary legislative framework is in
addition to the bits that have been suggested
around competitive urban land markets going right in at,
at the outset and rede redefining the purpose at the
outset, a couple of fail safes.
And what I mean by fail safes is things
that we hope never have to get invoked,
but if something else screws up in the system,
because we're all fallible as well-meaning as we are
as hardworking as we are, things are gonna screw up in this.
And if there's a fail safe at the back end,
if everything else goes wrong, well it provides a bit
of protection in that case,
but it also changes incentives through the system to try
and avoid that particular type of failure more closely.
So two that we've been thinking of there,
one would hinge on changes in land prices
at zoning boundaries.
Whether it's a zoning boundary
between the most intensive urban use
and the next most intensive or between suburban use
and rural use as enabling that we want things to be
and everybody wants there to be, uh,
well affordable housing.
We need to be able to build again
or we're gonna be in really big trouble
and continue to hemorrhage young people out.
If we under zone that churn up in land prices, land
that has the relatively scarce zoning permission to go up
to apartment towers compared to only townhouses
or townhouses compared to single family dwellings
or single family dwellings relative to to urban, to
to rural, the scarce zoning will attract a price premium.
We suggest that set a trigger value at any one
of these bo borders.
So if a landowner that's at the border
requests a private plan change that would bring
that owner's property into the up zone use
and doing so would increase the land value
by at least trigger multiple council must authorize it
so long as they're covering their own infrastructure costs.
It's not an un un demand for unfunded services.
It is, you must allow us to go taller here
or to put houses here.
If doing so improves land value sub, uh,
significantly enough, what that does is provide a backstop.
So if councils accidentally under zone there,
the places where the under zoning bites most severely
would be the ones that can be brought into the more
intensive use as demonstrated
by people wanting to live there.
'cause that's what makes the prices change.
So that's one fail safe
and wanting to avoid that will encourage councils
to avoid under zoning in the first place.
'cause they would not want to have that kind of little drips
and drabs coming in around the urban zone around each
of these zoning boundaries.
They would prefer to have boundaries that make sense.
It could induce a bit more discipline at the outset.
The second one is the put option
that my colleague described earlier.
You could also view it as being the
Public Works Act in reverse.
So under the Public Works Act, if the crown wishes
to take your property for a public purpose, they have
to compensate you for your net harm.
So if the public work improves the value of part
of your land but takes other part of your land,
well figure out the net difference
and you compensate the owner.
Similarly, for a regulatory imposition,
the person imposing the restriction could be served
with a reverse public works act notice
saying, no, this is great.
If you think there's a a legit public benefit on net
here, that's fine.
Here are the keys to my property.
You can realize the capital loss from it or you can try
and spread it across the beneficiaries
of the regulatory regime.
We can come up with some regime to do that,
but it gives that backstop option,
which we think would force better cost benefit thinking at
the outset because councils will not want to propose things
or the crown would not want to propose things
that reduce net net benefit
if they wind up being the ones to bear the cost.
It also reduces an asymmetry that we currently have where
for spending measures, council councils
and Crown have to be really careful
'cause they bear the cost of it.
Regulatory impositions don't have that same discipline.
We think both of these together,
right in the frame primary legislation could provide
discipline to the regulatory instruments that follow.
And I'll shut up, give some time for questions.
Thank you. Yeah, I was
Just gonna say, uh, we've nearly met time,
but we have got some questions, Cameron.
Thanks off the bat. Appreciate it.
Um, thank you for coming in.
Um, uh, Mr. Clark, you, you talked about, um,
the Nobel Prize being given for property rights
and clearly demonstrating
how important the society to be wealthy.
Um, Dr. Woodson, you talked about, um, the cabinet decisions
and the cabinet paper specifying
that this is gonna be on the enjoyment of property rights,
but now we've got a, a thing with, um,
it seems like from the submission, those are not being,
that those decisions
and those that evidence from, you know, Nobel Prize, uh,
when is, is not being reflected, um,
through net benefit tests and women property rights.
Do you think these should be, uh, a specific goal
or an overriding part of the goal or embedded in each goal?
How do you think we could, uh, put that into legislation
to reflect, you know, the even the international evidence
and the capital decisions?
Well, um, Bryce, um, perhaps could, you could ask
that question, but we, but Bryce did mention
what we could put purpose,
But purpose I think I'm trying to get at is it,
should it be in the purpose statement or
why would not in the goals?
If you put it in, in the purpose statement,
it would inform the goals
because the purpose statement comes first.
The alternative is to put it into the goal statement, um,
in some way, either the clause
and we haven't taken legal advice on, on what's best done,
which would be the best option. Um, that,
Yeah, so The best
drafting option. Yeah. Supplementary.
Yeah. So, uh, if it was to, if things were to, um,
change in, you know, decisions by ministers basically with,
with new MPDs, like how, how would
in the current framing an NPD be be like, if,
if an MPD like the national policy direction was created,
how would the minister making that decision
or implementing that have to pay any attention
to property rights in the current bill that signed?
Well, that, that'd have to do the cost benefit, the,
the value for money assessment first,
and that would have to identify whose property it was
and who's win, who were the winners and losers
and who'd, who'd lost in property rights
and then dependent amendment. Yeah, yeah.
I'm sorry. Under Bryce's version, this would have
to happen under the current version, not so much.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's, that's what I'm sort asking.
Yeah. So the essence of what we're saying is
that if there's national direction gonna be, um,
developed then
that it can be developed without any consideration whether
it's actually a good idea or a bad idea to,
for society effectively.
Thank I have Another, yeah,
we'll just, we've got a couple of others. Rachel.
Uh, thank you. Um, Eric, yes.
You were talking about value going up with,
with changes in zoning.
We had another ER say we shouldn't be able to zone
until the infrastructure is there
to enable the, the new housing.
I was wondering what you think about that relationship
between the need for Yeah, yeah, the need for infrastructure
and that link that heads to the value in the property,
We need to separate those
because keeping them linked as being a substantial cause
of the housing shortage, it leads to rationing.
Um, but that requires getting better mechanisms
for delivering infrastructure by calling.
Benno has been doing a fair bit of work on this,
on improving the IFF,
but also having provision for developers themselves
to invoke it and just lay out the infrastructure themselves
to get around some of these council bottlenecks.
So the solution to
that problem is making sure we get infrastructure funding
and financing rights so
that it doesn't wind up being a problem.
Fortunately, there is,
we were in select committee yesterday just talking about how
to, how to fix that version of it.
Mm-hmm. So address that through IFF.
Um, uh, another thing is, uh, one proposal
that we're also making also in our supplementary material is
to make infrastructure, uh, delivery
and finance problem, not an existing being in place problem.
So what you want is that it's, it's reasonably expected
that it can be delivered on the basis of the tools
that is, are avail money.
So the zoning, the purpose of the zoning is to say
that in principle, this is a good idea
to do X, Y, Z in this area.
And then the next question is, well, how do you do it?
If you tie the two together in the sense that the how has
to already be solved before you provide the in principle
idea that something good, good can be done here,
then you're shutting things down.
Yep. So you need a system where the, it's reasonable
that you can deliver it on the basis
of the tools that are available.
And that's the reframing that has
to happen in the act in general.
So we propose also a, a, a reframed way of, um,
like the drafting language for the, for the bill.
Thank you. Um, grant McCallum has a question.
Yeah. Thank you. Um, the regulatory relief part, be fair
to say, it's created a few discussion.
I think you'd be the biggest proponents
of the concept we've had come to so far.
Um, uh, just the, there's one aspect of it that,
that certainly that we could teach other.
It's the, it's respect of that from as, as interpreted.
Um, what's your views on that versus, I mean, going forward,
you know, the principles laid out.
If there's impact on someone's value,
there's then the councils or whoever's gotta weigh it up,
but the, the, the state saying, well actually,
if you've been land, as I understand the interpretation,
if you've been a landowner for a period of time,
that when this bill comes in, you have the potential to say,
well, that was done while I've owned the land.
It happened five years ago,
but we would like you to compensate us for that
or get rid of the regulation.
What's your view of it?
Did you, yeah. Do you want me to go with that? Yeah, sure.
It's a fun question, isn't it?
So there are many different ways that all
of this can fail that you'd want to avoid.
If you said it that there's no provision for retrospective,
then councils will wish to very quickly get
as many encumbrances on properties
before this legislation drops and takes.
It takes effect. That'd be the
obvious incentive that's created. They
Can't do plans.
Wait, yeah. If, well, they can't do plans.
There are other things that they, they could set in so
that you could say that there is reasonable expectation
that, um, any imposition was gonna be placed,
but you also don't want to compensate for things
that had been priced in at the time that land was purchased.
Um, so
That's, yeah.
Yes, that's the, There there's an option
to consider de novo,
but I doubt that there's much appetite for
that if you take it from,
was it priced in when the land was purchased,
and then consider also it the cost
of the regulation versus the benefits of it.
So similar to the Public Works Act kind of provisions,
And I have a lot of sympathy for councils
that are grappling with this concept.
I think that if it shouldn't be the councils of the meat
and the sandwich in this, if these restrictions are being
imposed at the top of the funnel by central government,
then central government should be the ones
who are on the hook for that sort of stuff.
And only, only if it's above what's, what's in the down,
past down then that should only be the bit
that's council are looking for.
Agree. But we'll take one last quick question from
la Thank you.
Um, I wanted to pick up on your fail safe Yeah. Idea.
And particularly the one where you talk about sort
of public works in reverse.
Yes. And I totally understand that, you know,
with public works you might be seizing the entire property,
you wanna build a motorway through there or something.
But what about in instances, say with like protection
of biodiversity or wahi tapu where it is actually
small pockets
and we are not talking necessarily about huge value
that would necessitate say like a full cost benefit analysis
of that site per property, that kind of thing.
How do you think, like what could be the fail safes that
sort of still protect those more like remnant pockets
of things rather than sort of high value as, as far
as we kind of understand economic value?
Yeah. It seems unlikely
that an owner would invoke a reverse public act.
Public works act hand the keys over
for a very small imposition on part of the property.
Hopefully if we could get cost benefit disciplines
through the rest of the act,
that would be the appropriate spot on this fail safest
for big problems in hope that we never get there.
Um, it would, the, the principle ought to be
that the beneficiaries of a regulation are the ones
who wind up bearing the cost of it.
And where the, where it's the broader public
that enjoy the benefits of biodiversity
and not a small local community that really ought
to be funded by central government paying for the amenity
that's being provided because you
get really perverse incentives.
Otherwise, there was wonderful work in the United States
by Dean and Dean Leic, uh,
looking at the incentives under the Endangered Species Act
where people were destroying habitat
to avoid the wildlife officers designating their property.
Mm-hmm. Right. This is, if you paid people to have habitat,
we'd get more habitat.
If you punish them for having it,
they'll try to avoid having it.
Um, it's far better to do this
as a spending measure than a regulatory measure.
Look, thank you very much.
We have met time, we've gone over time.
But thank you a very, um, thorough submission,
um, ations there.
So appreciate your time this morning.
We're always happy to take correspondence. Thank
You. Appreciate
that. Now move into private.